*****************
Stylizing widgets
*****************

Now that we know how to use a few basic widgets, we need to know how to 
customize their appearance and behavior.  In the most general sense, you do 
this by subclassing each widget you want to customize.  For example, if you 
were making a Pong GUI, you would probably end up defining some sort of 
retro/arcade style in classes like these::

    class PongLabel(glooey.Label):
        ...

    class PongButton(glooey.Button):
        ...

There are several advantages to stylizing widgets by subclassing them like 
this.  First, it's very easy to create multiple variants of the same widget 
type.  This comes in handy because most GUIs need several different kinds of 
button, header and body text, heavier and lighter borders or frames, etc.  
Second, subclassing does a great job of making the simple customizations easy 
(because superclasses can anticipate and facilitate common tweaks) and the 
complex ones possible (because subclasses can override any aspect of their base 
class).

This tutorial focuses on the simplest and easiest customizations, which 
typically amount to changing the appearance of existing widgets.  The 
:doc:`composing_widgets` and :doc:`making_widgets_from_scratch` tutorials will 
cover more powerful ways to customize widgets.

.. note::

    These tutorials will use the Wesnoth theme as an example.  Wesnoth is a 
    popular open-source, fantasy-themed, turn-based strategy game.  Although 
    Wesnoth itself does not use glooey, recapitulating parts of its user 
    interface is a good real-world demonstration of what glooey can do.

"Custom" attributes
===================
The easiest way to stylize a widget is to override its "custom" attributes.  
These are class-wide attributes --- conventionally prefixed with ``custom_`` 
--- that control basic properties like colors, images, fonts, etc.  The label 
widget is a good example:

.. demo:: stylizing_widgets/label.py

    class WesnothLabel(glooey.Label):
        custom_font_name = 'Lato Regular'
        custom_font_size = 10
        custom_color = '#b9ad86'
        custom_alignment = 'center'

    label = WesnothLabel('Hello world!')
    gui.add(label)

Here ``custom_font_name``, ``custom_font_size``, ``custom_colors``, and 
``custom_alignment`` are all attributes defined in the Label class (or one of 
its superclasses) for the explicit purpose of being overridden in subclasses.  
The Label class has a lot more of these attributes too, check the :doc:`API 
documentation <widgets/button>` for a complete list.

The background widget is another good example.  The more idiomatic way to write 
the demo from the :doc:`especially_useful_widgets` tutorial is like this:

.. demo:: stylizing_widgets/background.py

    class WesnothBorder(glooey.Background):
        custom_center = pyglet.resource.texture('center.png')
        custom_top = pyglet.resource.texture('top.png')
        custom_bottom = pyglet.resource.texture('bottom.png')
        custom_left = pyglet.resource.texture('left.png')
        custom_right = pyglet.resource.texture('right.png')
        custom_top_left = pyglet.resource.image('top_left.png')
        custom_top_right = pyglet.resource.image('top_right.png')
        custom_bottom_left = pyglet.resource.image('bottom_left.png')
        custom_bottom_right = pyglet.resource.image('bottom_right.png')

    border = WesnothBorder()
    gui.add(border)

Inner classes
=============
It's also common to stylize widgets with other widgets.  For example, you can 
stylize the button widget by providing different widgets for the label and the 
various mouse rollover states.  The syntax for doing this is analogous to the 
"custom" attributes defined above: just override a class variable with the 
widget class you want to use.  The trick is that you can also create that 
widget class *in place* (i.e. by defining an inner class).  This provides a 
very succinct way to customize composite widgets:

.. demo:: stylizing_widgets/button.py

    class WesnothButton(glooey.Button):
        Label = WesnothLabel

        class Base(glooey.Image):
            custom_image = pyglet.resource.image('base.png')

        class Over(glooey.Image):
            custom_image = pyglet.resource.image('over.png')

        class Down(glooey.Image):
            custom_image = pyglet.resource.image('down.png')

    button = WesnothButton('Click me!')
    gui.add(button)

The Button class has four widget classes we can override: Label, Base, Over, 
Down.  The first is used to format any text associated with the button.  The 
rest are used to display different background images in the different rollover 
states.

This example shows off both ways of using widgets to define style.  The Label 
attribute is directly set to an existing widget class.  The WesnothLabel widget 
we created earlier in this tutorial already has the style we want for this 
button, so it's nice that we can easily reuse it here.  The Base, Over, and 
Down attributes are overridden by new widget classes defined in place.  These 
background images aren't useful outside the button, so it's nice that we don't 
have to define them separately.

This is the first time we've seen the Image widget, but hopefully it's not too 
hard to understand.  It just displays the image specified by ``custom_image``.  
It's perhaps more common to derive Base, Over, and Down from Background (which 
allows the button to grow and shrink with the text), but we use Image here 
because the Wesnoth theme has fixed-size buttons.

